Lynn-Jones: We have minutes from our March, meeting.
Lynn-Jones: Thanks to Rob.
Lynn-Jones: And,
Lynn-Jones: I, will take a motion to approve them, unless there are some corrections or changes that anyone wants to make.
Ernest Cook: I move that we approve them.
Lynn-Jones: Alright, is there a second?
John Shreffler: Second.
Olivia Fischer Fox: Seconds.
Lynn-Jones: Okay,
Lynn-Jones: All in favor, please raise your, your real hands, not your Zoom hats, so that's, better.
Lynn-Jones: And, any abstentions from people who missed the meeting?
Lynn-Jones: I think I see one there.
Lynn-Jones: So, we will put that down as a 10 to 0 to 1 vote to approve the minutes.
Lynn-Jones: couple of, just, organizational business questions before we get to the political questions.
Lynn-Jones: Even though BU was slow to confirm it, I'm pretty confident that we are having an annual meeting on April 22nd at the Whiteman House.
Lynn-Jones: And, get some more announcements out about, that, and I will select a menu, too, similar to last year's. We have a title for the, talk.
Lynn-Jones: By Carl Zimba. Now.
Lynn-Jones: Carl Zimba's affiliation is that he was commissioned by the Muddy Water Initiative to do a study of the low water levels in the Muddy River.
Lynn-Jones: He has some other affiliations, but they don't really lend themselves to being on the program, because they create some confusion.
Lynn-Jones: But that's who Carl is, and the title, as you see on the agenda, Low Water and High Hopes, Olmsted and the Mudflats in the Muddy River. Because he goes back and looks at Olmstead's design, and why the water level isn't what it used to be.
Lynn-Jones: I had suggested mentioning the Army Corps of Engineers in that title, because they surely deserve some responsibility for the situation that we have in the Muddy River now. But…
Lynn-Jones: we decided that might not be a nice thing to do, so they are no longer mentioned in that title. And we'll try to allow a lot of time for that talk, because I think it's a pretty interesting subject, and he's really done some research.
Lynn-Jones: Deborah has made it possible, or possible very soon, for us to have a new Green Space Alliance map. Do you want to say anything more about
Lynn-Jones: where we are, Deborah.
Deborah Rivers: Well, it went to the printer a little over a week ago, maybe almost getting closer to 2 weeks.
Deborah Rivers: And, I… you and I both reviewed the digital proof, and, so it's… it's a go. I expect it to be delivered no later than the 21st of April, so it will be available for our annual meeting.
Lynn-Jones: Well, thank you for all that you've done with, getting the map updated. I've been,
Lynn-Jones: trying very hard to give away all the old maps before they become totally useless. They're still useful, even though they miss a few maps, but I think the new map will be up-to-date and better, and I hope we have it to distribute at the annual meeting, and
Lynn-Jones: many events thereafter. And thank you for all the work, and, you know, for putting up with my, is that comma in the right place questions, and all of those, you know, interjections as we put this together.
Lynn-Jones: We also have a newer…
Deborah Rivers: Well, and I have to still give Marion some credit, because the whole foundation of the map, I mean, is… it's based on the map that Marion did.
Deborah Rivers: A number of years ago, and so I think she still should get some credit here. And she also helped, in the early part of the process, refining down the properties we were and weren't gonna show, and…
Deborah Rivers: Providing pictures, photos.
Deborah Rivers: And Marion, I have to touch base with you about, what you want to put on the website, because I gotta get that to you.
Lazar Family: I think the credit really goes to Deborah for sticking with this. It was a long haul, and I admire her persistence in doing it.
Lynn-Jones: when we began, I didn't know how we would actually generate the copy, the images that are the map, and Debra made that happen.
Lynn-Jones: and really thought about the layout, the design, and put it together in a very attractive way, and just put it together so it could go to the printer, which is the really key thing. Building on the basic, you know, design, but taking all of the new ingredients
Lynn-Jones: Which got down to, what name will we use for some particular parcels? Because different people call some parks different things, which gets really awkward and political sometimes. But we,
Lynn-Jones: We went with what people usually, you know, call a park, as opposed to what people think it should be called, most of the time.
Lynn-Jones: But it was complicated, even though what you think would be basic.
Lynn-Jones: And, since Marion deserves some credit for this, it's a good time for me to mention that, consistent with the, last, board meeting's discussion.
Lynn-Jones: Marion will be recognized for her long-time contribution to so many different elements of the BGSA's work, including place in the map. And to honor her, we are making a donation to the Emerald Necklace Conservancy.
Lynn-Jones: Instead of, you know, buying a plaque, or a cake, or whatever, contributing to the ENC in Marion's name. And, I think they are already aware of that.
Lynn-Jones: And, consistent with Marion's wishes, I will make a very short speech on this topic at the annual meeting. I promise.
Lynn-Jones: of…
Lynn-Jones: there is a new issue of place, at the printer, or somewhere close to being produced. I look on my doorstep.
Lazar Family: Yeah, baby.
Lynn-Jones: now and again, but I know it's coming.
Lynn-Jones: Do they have a rough estimate?
Lazar Family: I expect it every day. That's all I can say. Unless, you know, I can get after them and find out.
Lazar Family: usually it just shows up sooner than I expect, but.
Lynn-Jones: Nope.
Lazar Family: Who knows?
Lynn-Jones: Well, I, expect it will be available for the annual meeting.
Lazar Family: Sure, it will be.
John Shreffler: That was the plan.
Lynn-Jones: I, will reiterate that I would welcome some assistance
Lynn-Jones: doing some of the important things that we need to do for the Green Space Alliance, particularly communications and getting the, e-update, the, e-newsletter, out every month.
Lynn-Jones: And, you know, I call the e-update a newsletter, some people call place a newsletter, I call Place a magazine. But, you know, different people refer to different things, and sometimes it gets confusing, but that's how I, you know, think about it.
Lynn-Jones: And I just have to say about the e-update.
Lynn-Jones: I went on a walk, regarding Indigenous peoples' sites in Brookline, on, Saturday.
Lynn-Jones: And it was bitterly cold, but there was still a crowd of about 20 people. And about half of them said, oh, I found out about this because of the Green Space Alliance newsletter.
Lynn-Jones: Emily Norton, head of the Charles River Watershed Association, was there with her partner and a lot of other people, and they all said, oh, yes, I look at the newsletter always and come to these events. So someone actually reads it, and they actually, you know, get something out of it, which is a great thing.
Lynn-Jones: And it was a very interesting walk. More on history than green space, but we did spend some time in what is now known as Freedman Park. It has had different names, as part of that, walking tour, as well as the old, burying ground.
Lynn-Jones: Which is, where at least one Indigenous person is, buried.
Lynn-Jones: We don't have to answer this question right away, but I have asked the question. What
Lynn-Jones: should we do to celebrate the Green Space Alliance's anniversary?
Lynn-Jones: And I've had a few, you know, offline discussions about should we do a new edition of Landscapes of Brookline, the book?
Lynn-Jones: Should we raise money? Should we have parties? Should we have an art exhibit? I talked to Michael Berger, who was involved, I think the last time around. I didn't realize until I saw him at what's now Boston College, formerly Pine Manor, that the exhibit actually took place in, their…
Lynn-Jones: I'm not sure what you want to call it, but main room in the former mansion, there. At least, that's how Michael described it. Great place. In fact, I was there for another event.
Lynn-Jones: One big question I have is, should we raise money, and if so, what for? Should we do it for us, or to give something to the town, or some other entity?
Lynn-Jones: So, I don't know how many of you have had a chance to think about this, and it seems awfully early, but if we don't make a plan now.
Lynn-Jones: 2027 is going to start, and that's our anniversary year, and some things require lead time.
Lynn-Jones: Any thoughts at all at this point? We will revisit this question at least once.
Lynn-Jones: Okay, I just wanted to keep it out there. I've, you know, circulated a list, which we probably… we couldn't do everything on that list, probably, but there are ideas that seem appropriate, and I haven't thought of a particular, you know, fundraising target.
Lynn-Jones: I mean, do we raise enough money to endow place in perpetuity, so it's always going to be published and part of the Green Space Alliance mission? Or do we raise money to give the town X number of trees or something else to be planted somewhere?
Lynn-Jones: Or something else. Or do we not raise money at all, and just have parties and celebrations and, you know, publications to honor the 40th anniversary?
Lynn-Jones: Turning to the much more political questions,
Lynn-Jones: Which can be, more difficult.
Lynn-Jones: Even than doing a new map,
Lynn-Jones: There is going to be an override on the ballot.
Lynn-Jones: I don't know how closely you followed it. I sent an analysis of the override and the budget to try to just cover, the main points regarding green space relevant funding.
Lynn-Jones: I don't know if this organization has ever taken a position on an override, but as I understand our 501c3 status, we can. It's not as though we're prohibited from doing it.
Lynn-Jones: There's over $23 million, of which $625,000 is clearly in the, you know, sustainability, parks, and open space budget category.
Lynn-Jones: You know, that's, you know, not a lot, but, some of those particular positions matter a lot. For example, to, Aaron Schute.
Lynn-Jones: And she would love to have them funded, and has made that clear to us privately, before the override question was adopted, and she, like all town employees, cannot really, you know, speak
Lynn-Jones: Out one way or another regarding an override, but in our discussions of budgets for the last couple of years, she has lamented not having that horticultural specialist position.
Lynn-Jones: And not having enough staff to implement the tree preservation by-law.
Lynn-Jones: So… I'm open to any opinions on this. I mean, we could obviously…
Lynn-Jones: Recommend a yes vote, a no vote, or just not take a position and provide information on what's in the override.
Lynn-Jones: Oh, and speaking of information,
Lynn-Jones: we do have the questions, the answers to our questions, now posted, thanks to Marion, on the Green Space Alliance website, and we will call people's attention to those. And I said, you may know who you're going to vote for anyway, but it's interesting to read.
Lynn-Jones: What people say, about those, issues.
Lynn-Jones: And it's interesting to wonder if they thought that they were writing and might get an endorsement from the Green Space Alliance, even though we made it clear we don't. But they're certainly making a pitch, in those, answers to people who are interested in green space.
Lynn-Jones: So, I see, Ernest has a hand up.
Ernest Cook: Hi, Sean, just a question. Do you think if we could raise…
Ernest Cook: Part of the salary of the horticultural specialist that we might be able to convince
Ernest Cook: the town to make it more of a priority. You know, if we put in $25,000 a year or something like that.
Ernest Cook: I mean, I think that would be a great thing to raise money for, for our 40th.
Ernest Cook: But I don't think we could pay for the whole thing for, like, 3 years or something. That would be very expensive.
Lynn-Jones: Yeah, it would… be much more than our annual budget.
Lynn-Jones: Just, you know, even $25,000 would be about 50% of, what we…
Ernest Cook: Yeah, I know.
Lynn-Jones: I don't know, you know, we have this…
Lynn-Jones: precedent that the Sustainability Division's positions are funded by an anonymous donor who gave.
Lynn-Jones: A bunch of money, but that was $750,000 over several years, which is…
Ernest Cook: Right.
Lynn-Jones: Beyond what we would raise.
Ernest Cook: Yes, I bet.
Lynn-Jones: So, but my answer is… I don't know, but,
Lynn-Jones: Okay. It's a lot. It would be a big reach, I think, to… Raise that money.
Lynn-Jones: Antonia!
Antonia Bellalta: If I may.
Lynn-Jones: Certainly.
Antonia Bellalta: I think a question of that has come up in the past, and nonetheless, It's something that is funded
Antonia Bellalta: long-term, I think the town would be pretty skeptical in having it just be a short-term position.
Antonia Bellalta: I think it's a fabulous idea. And then I wanted to talk more about a position on the override. I think it would be very helpful
Antonia Bellalta: if…
Antonia Bellalta: if people don't feel comfortable taking a position, is speaking about why it would affect green space. How, you know, not just
Antonia Bellalta: the urban forestry, but what does that mean to the upkeep of Grieben? So, making a statement about it without saying we support it or don't support it.
Antonia Bellalta: That would be my, my, my…
Antonia Bellalta: I think the more information that people know as to what the budget cut is, what the override
Antonia Bellalta: is going to support, besides schools, that… for Green Space Alliance, you know, and open… because park and rec… recreation gets funded by its own program, so it's more the open spaces and park.
Antonia Bellalta: And, I think DPW, if I'm not…
Antonia Bellalta: misinformed is the one that will be most effective, because there'll be no more maintenance, or there'll be less maintenance, and I think parks need more maintenance right now, and more care.
Antonia Bellalta: So that's a huge… that's a huge, you know…
Antonia Bellalta: But it's a big override, so I'm not sure how, you know, how the community is feeling.
Lynn-Jones: Yeah, there are a lot of different items in it, but in very broad terms, you can say it's mainly for the schools.
Lynn-Jones: There's certainly other funding, but… -Oh.
Antonia Bellalta: But… but we would be effective if it doesn't go…
Antonia Bellalta: the green space would be affected, by just all the things that are getting cut, and what those cuts would mean for Green Space Alliance. I mean, for open space, not green space, but for open space in Brooklyn.
Lynn-Jones: Yeah, the, it's a little bit hard to figure out
Lynn-Jones: how much is cut in a no-override scenario, but the bigger impact is, in a no-override scenario, those five positions, horticultural specialist.
Lynn-Jones: Deputy Director of Sustainability and Natural Resources, and a Program Manager for Sustainability and Natural Resources, and two FTEs to implement the Tree Preservation By-law. Those positions are not funded if the override fails.
Antonia Bellalta: Richard.
Lynn-Jones: The no override scenario.
Lynn-Jones: I think, I think there's one position that DPW loses, regardless of whether the override passes or fails. But it definitely doesn't get those five positions.
Lynn-Jones: If it's voted down.
Lynn-Jones: Deborah?
Antonia Bellalta: Thank you.
Deborah Rivers: Well, I was gonna… Susan just put this in the chat, but I think that's the right approach, is to really point out exactly what Antonia said of what the impact would be.
Deborah Rivers: but not…
Deborah Rivers: you know, so that people understand it's not just about schools. But that would be different than just endorsing it. I think. Would it be… give people an explanation of why it's important?
Deborah Rivers: to, open spaces.
Lynn-Jones: Olivia.
Olivia Fischer Fox: I personally would love to see Brookline Green Space Alliance endorse
Olivia Fischer Fox: The override, because so much…
Olivia Fischer Fox: Has gone into getting the, tree by-law up and running.
Olivia Fischer Fox: Lots of man hours,
Olivia Fischer Fox: as well as sustainability up and running, and to just cut it, it seems like such a waste. When we've made progress, then to take… take it all away is really gonna set Brookline back.
Olivia Fischer Fox: I've just heard from Aaron… I mean, Aaron's pleading to get…
Olivia Fischer Fox: the community to understand that. So, anything we can do to support
Olivia Fischer Fox: Aaron and DPW and all the hard work that staff has done, I think it's imperative to try and put our best foot forward here, personally. Now, I understand everybody's situation is different, but it would be interesting to
Olivia Fischer Fox: To hear from the group, if people are comfortable endorsing.
Olivia Fischer Fox: I would be.
Lynn-Jones: And I will say, just, you know, in the interest of full disclosure, I am on record as personally endorsing this override. I'm listed, along with other people, and I have not in any time
Lynn-Jones: mentioned my affiliation with the Green Space Alliance, when I've recorded a video for override supporters. I'm not sure what they're going to do with that, and when I've given them my name, I think they're listed as a town meeting member from Precinct 1, and, I have not, you know, mentioned
Lynn-Jones: the affiliation. And I will say, again, it's very important not to make a pitch for the override that says town staff like Aaron Schute support it, because that's been a controversy in the past, when it looks as though
Lynn-Jones: town funds are being used in any way as part of a pro-override campaign. This, you know, can be… can set off a backlash and complaints and muddy the waters, so to speak, with, you know… and I don't think anyone's doing that, but if…
Lynn-Jones: You were to say, you know, publicly, we should do this because Aaron Schutez says we really need the money.
Lynn-Jones: It could come back and be used as an example of how town employees are abusing their position.
Lynn-Jones: Because it's a very strictly worded law that says, once the question's on the ballot, town employees have to, you know, shut up and not advocate.
Lynn-Jones: Rob.
Rob Schoen: Yeah, I would just point out that I don't know how the vote's gonna go, but I've been taken aback by how…
Rob Schoen: Strongly some people feel about this, like…
Rob Schoen: there are people on the no side that are very, very angry about the override, and I'd just be a little bit concerned about if those are people that we've…
Rob Schoen: that have donated to the… to the Green Space Alliance in the past, like, you know, I'd be concerned about alienating them, because I was just… I'm surprised at how strongly some people feel about it.
Rob Schoen: In this particular override vote, so I just wanted to throw that out there.
Lynn-Jones: There.
Lynn-Jones: Any… well, I see, Susan, and then I saw John.
Susan Helms Daley: Thanks, Ed. I agree with what Rob just said, and, I think… I…
Susan Helms Daley: I guess I just think that, by pointing out the impacts that the override could have on open space and green space and Brookline, it's almost an implicit endorsement,
Susan Helms Daley: But without… Alienating anyone who's… who's…
Susan Helms Daley: responding negatively, which I… I have sympathy for that position. I'm not going on record as, as endorsing this…
Susan Helms Daley: particular override. I'm planning to vote in favor of it, but I just, it's the biggest in state history, and that it gives me and a lot of other people pause. So I feel like our… our job
Susan Helms Daley: is more as, educator on this issue.
Lynn-Jones: And I will say, I was assuming that we would, you know, have an informational statement in the next e-update.
Lynn-Jones: On the website, perhaps, too, just saying, you know, if you're interested in green space, this is what's in the override, along… along with many other things.
Lynn-Jones: And basically the five positions. And I have to say, because there's been… there's so much in the override, and there's so much discussion, and there's been a complicated discussion of how to do it with different tiers, which may or may not actually be tiers, but, some of this has gotten, you know.
Lynn-Jones: Overshadowed, because it's just one line that says something about unfunded mandates or programs that doesn't make clear exactly what it is in that $625,000.
Lynn-Jones: So, John, and then Olivia, if that is a new hand, not the old hand.
John Shreffler: I would recommend endorsing the override, because I think that the positions that are in question are essential.
John Shreffler: I think that there's always going to be opposition to these things, and I get completely what Dick Venka said years back about the cumulative effect of these overrides on taxes.
John Shreffler: But, you know, if we don't actually maintain the positions for sustainability, it's going to wither on the vine. It's a new thing, and it needs help.
John Shreffler: That's my take.
Lynn-Jones: And to be just… clear about
Lynn-Jones: as I understand it, those two sustainability positions are funded for the coming fiscal year, but then the anonymous grant runs out, and they would not…
John Shreffler: Yes, but they need to be permanent. They have no staff.
Lynn-Jones: Good saying.
John Shreffler: position is Alex and Alexandra, and that's it. That's not enough.
Lynn-Jones: Yeah, just the way the override is structured, the tax increase is phased in as necessary to fund different positions and, well, a lot of the school budget as it increases over the three years. Olivia?
Olivia Fischer Fox: Just a question for Rob. Rob, you were saying that you've been hearing, about opposition to the override, and I'm just wondering…
Olivia Fischer Fox: if you have more on that, like, are there organizations that are endorsing no, within Brookline, or…
Rob Schoen: I mean, I think there is a no organization being kind of… it kind of got going late, but I just know from, like, I had an experience in advisory committee, and the issue was very… it took… I think it took a lot of people by surprise, and it was really very much framed around this… the idea that,
Rob Schoen: older retirees, single, like, homeowners that are on fixed income, can't afford to stay in Brookline because of
Rob Schoen: the rise in property taxes. So, that's, I think, I think where a lot of the no sentiment is being framed, and it's a very, you know, obviously it's very sympathetic
Rob Schoen: position, it's not.
Rob Schoen: It's not something to just be disregarded, so…
John Shreffler: Rob, those come up every time you have an override.
John Shreffler: 5 of them in the time I've been paying attention, and that's a point that comes up every time.
Rob Schoen: But it's a cumulative effect.
John Shreffler: It is, and Danka showed that, and I get that, but, you know, the… what Sean's been telling us with the budget is that the town is in this kind of rawhide-strap-melting-under-hot-sun budget, and there's not enough money.
Rob Schoen: No, no.
Lynn-Jones: Well, is there any further discussion on the question of Green Space Alliance endorsement for the, you know, upcoming override question on the May ballot?
Lynn-Jones: If there were to be a motion to endorse it,
Lynn-Jones: I would… well, we would have a vote, and if it's endorsed, then we have an endorsement position. If that motion fails, then that does not mean we recommend a no vote, but that we have no position.
Lynn-Jones: On the override. In theory, someone could then move to recommend that we endorse a no vote, and we would have the same situation of it passing or failing, but we may not get to that point.
Lynn-Jones: John, is your hand still up, or is that the previous…
John Shreffler: Oh, no, I'm done, thanks.
Lynn-Jones: Okay.
Rob Schoen: But regardless of the vote, we'll have… there'll be an information…
Lynn-Jones: Yeah, absolutely, and
Lynn-Jones: you know, I sort of previewed that in the budget analysis I sent, and there's always the trade-off between
Lynn-Jones: explaining all the details, exactly what does a horticultural specialist do, and keeping it concise so that people will read it. But,
Lynn-Jones: you know, I can try to strike that balance and keep it to a paragraph instead of a page about those positions that are, you know, likely to be funded.
Lynn-Jones: I also don't know who… I'll get to you in a second. I don't know who is writing the pro override statement that will be put,
Lynn-Jones: on the ballot, or next to the ballot, basically, for people when they vote. We circulated ahead of time, I assume. There will be both a pro and a no statement. Town Council has solicited, you know, input.
Lynn-Jones: But I don't know whether whoever writes that will highlight the green space, or what they'll talk about. Rob, do you know?
Rob Schoen: Well, I just… I had talked to someone on the Select Board last week, and they said that the deadline for someone to volunteer to do the no was on Friday, and this was on, like, Wednesday, and nobody had volunteered, so I don't know that they actually have someone.
Lynn-Jones: Yeah, I…
Rob Schoen: Right in the.
Lynn-Jones: I wasn't sure if they would, but, you know, just to…
Lynn-Jones: to name names, I know these people mind being named, but Stephen Reeders, Alak Samani, and Elizabeth Chiles all have been publicly quoted, as, you know, opposing the override or founding the organization that is recommending a no vote. So, there's someone out there.
Rob Schoen: It's in the Brookline News, there's an article, I was gonna post a link to it.
Lynn-Jones: And, given the timing of the vote to put it on the ballot, there wasn't much time for anyone to get organized to write for or against.
Lynn-Jones: Debbie, you're next.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: Thank you. I just wanted to… I agree with Rob,
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: that people are really angry about this one, and I'm in Precinct 15, and I know that… and I'm a town meeting member, and I know that we're getting calls.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: group is getting calls, and people are really angry, and I've… it seems much more than in the past.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: I do know that there are some people in our group, our town meeting members that are against it, and I'm not sure if they're gonna make a public statement about it.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: another meeting, but, you know, we, in 15, we have a lot of single-family homes and older people, that are trying to stay in their homes, so I agree with Rob. I have not experienced as much anger as I have
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: In the past, with the other overrides, and I think maybe it's on top of
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: you know, the… you know, the mismanagement of the school funds, and the changing of, you know, some of the programs, and I think people are just really upset. So, I just wanted to add that.
Lynn-Jones: And I just, you know, will reiterate
Lynn-Jones: that, you know, this is a question of what this organization should do, leaving aside what we might do individually. And just to frame it that way, that's what we would be making a decision about.
Lynn-Jones: Anita?
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: Yes.
Lynn-Jones: Are you… Frozen.
Ernest Cook: And Frozen, maybe.
Lynn-Jones: Well, she left, and maybe she will come back, and I hope that'll be, possible before we, you know, take a vote, because I would like her to give a…
Lynn-Jones: Have a chance, but she seems to have lost the, the connection, there.
Lynn-Jones: So…
Lynn-Jones: While we're waiting for, Anita, I'll just say there's not much new on the other issues, like, Beacon Street Bridal Path, Fenway Multi-Use Path.
Lynn-Jones: The Beacon Street Bridal Path seems to be kind of stalled as they wait for information. They got off to a great start.
Lynn-Jones: And, the Fenway multi-use path, I think, is still, stalled.
Lynn-Jones: the…
Lynn-Jones: Plans for the, seed branch project are basically, you know, final now in terms of tree removal and replacement, all along.
Lynn-Jones: I didn't get a chance to go to the open house on May 30th, that they had a town hall.
Lynn-Jones: But, Arlene.
Arlene: Yeah, Sean, I… I also lost my connection, so I may have missed some of the discussion. But do you have information? Another bottleneck to me in this override vote is, the… the…
Arlene: The audit that the school
Arlene: department, turned down, a couple of years ago in town meeting, and I think they've since had to hire an independent auditing
Arlene: company. Do you, or does anybody have information about, the information that was gathered in that audit, or…
Arlene: the changes, if any, made because of an audit, because I think that it is, you know, I agree with John, you know, we've sort of been here before, but…
Arlene: It is kind of hard for the rest of the town to see so much of the override go to the schools and not feel confident.
Arlene: that with… Student population numbers going down.
Arlene: That things are being run as efficiently as they should be on the school department.
Lynn-Jones: Well…
Lynn-Jones: I can give you the quick answer, which may not be totally reassuring, but the audit, which was not really called an audit, but a review, was conducted. You know, the, somewhat disturbing results came in.
Lynn-Jones: And the upshot was the school said, we're making changes, and I think there might even have been a memorandum of agreement between the schools and the town, if I remember correctly, on that particular point. I was just looking at the website a few days ago to see, you know, the school's response and what they were saying.
Lynn-Jones: But, you know, the key question is what happens next going forward, as opposed to the schools saying, yes, we get it, and we're going to, you know, we understand these problems, and we're fixing these problems, which is what I read, you know, on the website when I went through
Lynn-Jones: some of these materials the other day. But there's a mind-boggling amount of information out there on this question, and on the question of,
Lynn-Jones: Enrollment,
Lynn-Jones: I think the numbers were, I may have this flipped. 10% decline in students, 11% decline in staff, or vice versa. But there had been that, you know.
Lynn-Jones: those cuts. Whether that's looking forward at the, you know, likely cuts even with an override, or projecting out, I can't say, but the schools did have a very specific answer to that question when they were trying to say.
Lynn-Jones: How much they had responded to the enrollment decline.
Lynn-Jones: Thank you.
Lynn-Jones: Anita, are you back, and would you like to comment?
Lynn-Jones: I don't know if Anita is able to.
Deborah Rivers: She's showing up, but she's showing as music.
Anita Johnson: came back on, I got… I don't know, I got jerked off, I don't know what happened.
Lynn-Jones: It wasn't me. You just…
Anita Johnson: It never occurred to me. I think we may have moved on from the…
Lynn-Jones: Well, we held… we held off on taking a vote because we wanted to hear from you before…
Lynn-Jones: You may have the last word here. Or if you're frozen again, you may not have any word.
Ernest Cook: Frozen again.
Susan Helms Daley: You might want to turn off your video, Anita. It could,
Susan Helms Daley: It could help us hear you, if you're speaking.
Ernest Cook: Yeah, must be internet service problems.
Lynn-Jones: Okay, well, I think we have to move, forward.
Lynn-Jones: And, someone wants to make a motion that the Green Space Alliance vote to, endorse
Lynn-Jones: the override that will be on the May 5th ballot.
Lynn-Jones: If that's moved and seconded, we would take a vote on whether to take that position.
Lynn-Jones: And I heard different opinions on this question in the discussion.
Lynn-Jones: Hearing no motion, then we will not have a position, but just provide, you know, information on, you know, what's in the override relevant to green space.
Lynn-Jones: What becomes a little bit more complicated is describing what's in the override that is green in the broader sense of the term, like the solar panels and so on, and there are many other things that probably are going to improve energy efficiency and sustainability, decarbonization.
Lynn-Jones: But I will, you know, try to focus more narrowly on what it's…
Lynn-Jones: Gonna mean for green space, if the vote is yes or no.
Lynn-Jones: And summarize that.
Lynn-Jones: Rob.
Rob Schoen: Yeah, just, one thing is, and it wasn't… I don't think it was in your notes, but, I think one thing when we spoke with Aaron and, Millie, especially Aaron, she… there was this kind of discussion about how the override doesn't pass, how it could be put, like, a lot of the positions
Rob Schoen: In jeopardy because we're not paying You know, market wages.
Rob Schoen: Right, I kind of came away from that conversation concerned that, she didn't feel like she had the budget to kind of keep her department as well staffed as we need, because they can't, you know, have competitive wages. So I don't know if we can add… if that's relevant to add to
Rob Schoen: To that, or if that was more off the record.
Lynn-Jones: Yeah, I will… See if there is anything, you know, on the record, there.
Lynn-Jones: And going forward, you know, it's hard to know exactly what will happen.
Lynn-Jones: You know, if the override fails, I'd say there's probably going to be another override question on the ballot. What would that look like? I don't know.
Lynn-Jones: But one interesting thing, if you looked very closely at the Select Board meeting that actually voted on the override and the accompanying documents, in their proposed slightly smaller override.
Lynn-Jones: What got cut? The green space related items.
Lynn-Jones: Clearly, they were the low priority for,
Lynn-Jones: Maybe the select board, but certainly the town administrator and staff. So, if there were a follow-on, smaller override, it might not include…
Lynn-Jones: These items, regardless of the general question, and it might also not make it possible to pay competitive salaries across the board, and all sorts of other hypothetical
Lynn-Jones: financial problems could emerge if you had an override half the size of this one, and so on. The other question that's very hard to answer is exactly what would happen to the budgets going forward in a no-override scenario.
Lynn-Jones: The cuts that have been offered might or might not be the actual cuts that were implemented. That doesn't mean it would be any better, it just might be different going forward, because it would be up to town meeting each year to vote on that budget.
Lynn-Jones: Marilyn, and then Susan.
Marilyn Ray Smith: made out of this discussion for a lot of reasons, because I have mixed feelings on both sides.
Marilyn Ray Smith: But, with respect to Rob's comment as a former State bureaucrat.
Marilyn Ray Smith: People who work in government always say the world is coming to an end if they don't get more money.
Marilyn Ray Smith: And they always find the money that they need for things that they really care about.
Marilyn Ray Smith: And so, I think that… I think it's, you know, I understand Aaron's perspective fully, but I also think that what Rob is saying… what Lynn is… Sean is saying is true.
Marilyn Ray Smith: is that once they get back to the reality that this is the budget that we have, then they start looking at their priorities in a different kind of way. And it's classic.
Marilyn Ray Smith: for the people to go after the green space stuff first, that gets… that's the first cut and the last funding. But that's because of the weakness of the advocacy community, not because…
Marilyn Ray Smith: You know, so that's kind of our problem at a different level.
Marilyn Ray Smith: But that's typically what happens in these scenarios. We see it happen at the state level all the time, and they're just repeating that. And so, of course Aaron wants more money.
Marilyn Ray Smith: And of course she can make do with less.
Marilyn Ray Smith: Both of those things are true.
Marilyn Ray Smith: And she doesn't have to just sacrifice green space. She can find other things to… other places to find money if she really wants to.
Lynn-Jones: Susan.
Susan Helms Daley: Thanks, Sean. You mentioned a few, items that were not specifically, green space related, but…
Susan Helms Daley: eco-friendly,
Susan Helms Daley: not to give you more work, but I would love to see those included in the description of the environmental impacts of, the override. I feel like…
Susan Helms Daley: It's the same audience, you know, and it makes… makes the argument that much stronger in favor.
Susan Helms Daley: If that's easy enough for you to do, or if I can help with that. Thanks.
Lynn-Jones: Yeah, if you could help, that would be great, because in some cases,
Lynn-Jones: Those items are in the base budget.
Lynn-Jones: Who knows if they would re… remain in the base budget, if there were… if the override failed.
Lynn-Jones: That's what makes it, you know, hard to know. You can spin all sorts of scenarios about what could go wrong if there's a no vote on the override.
Lynn-Jones: The solar panels, presumably, are safe, but
Lynn-Jones: You know, someone might decide that, no, that money should be used to
Lynn-Jones: You know, keep more police officers on the beat, or whatever.
Lynn-Jones: And the CIP could be tinkered with a lot more than it has already in a no-override scenario.
Lynn-Jones: But it's hard to say, but if you can think of particular things that are in the override that are eco-friendly green more generally, I thought the two sustainability positions were very much in that category. You know, they're not green space, but they're… they're green.
Susan Helms Daley: Great, thanks.
Lynn-Jones: Did I see one other hand, here?
Lynn-Jones: Okay. If I don't see a motion, going once, going twice, you know, Arlene.
Arlene: Sean, I just… I had a little trouble hearing, Marilyn, but I think to… to,
Arlene: One of the things that has been difficult over the years is level funding, or not even level funding, the park and open space budget.
Arlene: And… I wonder if it's fair to ask you
Arlene: If you're gonna write something about what's included in this override, starting with a statement saying, that we…
Arlene: We propose that in the base budget.
Arlene: The… the park department is fairly… funded.
Arlene: Because we know… I mean, one of the things we did talk about, I think in that meeting with Erin.
Arlene: was… The fact that there are other departments that have, increased
Arlene: More, maybe, with inflation or whatever over the years, and the park budget has not kept up.
Arlene: And so, even being level funded, we're sometimes moving backwards.
Arlene: And I wonder if that's fear, you know, to say, you know, if it's our job to be that advocacy group.
Arlene: to say that we… we know how important parks and open space, and if you wanted to, you know, broaden it to sustainability, is to the town. And we support
Arlene: You know,
Arlene: I forget how we've put it before, but at least 11 funded budget item in the base budget.
Lynn-Jones: Nope.
Lynn-Jones: In a nutshell, to be really blunt, the…
Lynn-Jones: Operating budget for parks and open space is bad.
Lynn-Jones: It's bad if there is an override, and it's bad if there isn't an override. The one difference… well, there are two differences the override might make. They get back that horticultural specialist position.
Lynn-Jones: And maybe if they have two people who are full-time on tree preservation, other people whose, you know, time is not being diverted
Lynn-Jones: to that area would have more time to do their core jobs. And I'm thinking particularly of Jack Schleifer.
Lynn-Jones: But it is a complicated argument to try to make.
Lynn-Jones: About how the override, you know, has an impact. But I certainly can work that comment in to the overall, you know, information, you know.
Lynn-Jones: saying that, you know, certainly the horticultural specialist and, you know, tree preservation folks will have some impact on the ability of the Parks and Open Space Division to carry out its core mission of, you know, maintaining our parks.
Lynn-Jones: Rob.
Rob Schoen: But just a question, in an over-override scenario, I thought there was talk of just not enforcing the tree preservation by-law.
Rob Schoen: Rather than have Jack… so diverted. Have you heard anything official about that, or…
Lynn-Jones: Well… It's… it's an interesting question.
Lynn-Jones: But, you know, the hit the pause button was the way it was described.
Lynn-Jones: And…
Lynn-Jones: Is that really going to be feasible? Because there are people on this call who would say, it's the law, we should enforce it, it's important. And the other issue is, you know, in its first year, the tree preservation by-law brought in $75,000.
Lynn-Jones: Not enough for two FTEs to implement it, the amount of staff that Aaron says would be required, but a substantial amount of money.
Lynn-Jones: If you had no override, would you use that money?
Lynn-Jones: To plant trees, or would you use it to hire a part-time person, or continue to have a part-time person, or maybe a full-time person to implement the tree preservation by-law?
Lynn-Jones: I've asked this question, and it's sort of like, well, who knows, maybe.
Lynn-Jones: We're in a different ballgame if the override fails, and we'd have to look at those. The ideal situation would be to use that money to support tree planting, basically. But…
Lynn-Jones: Money's fungible, you can use it for other things, too.
Lynn-Jones: And will that money grow?
Lynn-Jones: You know, Olivia could talk about this at much greater length, but one of the interesting dilemmas with the Tree Preservation By-law is how rigorously do you enforce it, or do you give people waivers for whatever reason? And is your objective to save every tree, or to make some money, so that you can fund implementation of the Tree Preservation By-law?
Lynn-Jones: Because, you know, if you save every single tree and no one ever pays into the fund, then you don't have the cash. But you've done a great job of preserving a tree canopy. There's some sort of point there between saving every tree and maximizing revenue where, you know.
Lynn-Jones: The law sort of ticks along as intended with cash coming in, but it also makes a real difference to the tree canopy.
Lynn-Jones: And I'm not sure exactly where we are on that, you know, spectrum right now. But we know in one year, the very first year, with a lot of, you know, glitches and, you know, fits and starts and…
Lynn-Jones: Eventually bringing a person on board. We raised $75,000.
Lynn-Jones: And that's probably a floor, not a ceiling, for how much this bylaw is going to bring in, based on other towns' experiences, other cities' experience, too. But that's a long-winded answer to, you know, it's really hard to know whether we actually hit the pause button, or we sort of halfway pause and still
Lynn-Jones: Have people involved.
Lynn-Jones: Deborah?
Deborah Rivers: I just want to say, I feel that this is the right direction to take, because… and in fact, it's going to give people more information than if we just endorse the override. That might be a simpler process, but if the time is spent to develop this.
Deborah Rivers: then we need to make sure it gets out to people, and I don't know if that means a special email to everybody who we have their email address for, or what the idea is. I think it has to be more than just putting it on our website.
Deborah Rivers: But I think it's consistent with not endorsing somebody for select board, and just to get the information out there to people, and people to realize it's not just money going to the schools. Quite frankly, I'll just say that the last override, where so much money went to Pierce, which I think
Deborah Rivers: had a lot of flaws. That override just barely made it, and I think that there's a potential for that to happen again.
Deborah Rivers: But I think we need to get the word out so the people who may be skeptical about the schools, but who really value open space, get the message.
Lynn-Jones: Olivia.
Olivia Fischer Fox: I just want to thank everybody for their input on this conversation, and I've… my mind has been changed to support what Antonia put out initially, and what Deborah is saying.
Lynn-Jones: Okay.
Lynn-Jones: Do we have a consensus on information?
Lynn-Jones: Including, a note saying that we're, you know, concerned about the base budget for all park and open space operations, and these are…
Lynn-Jones: The items that are in the override that are directly related to green space, and to the extent we can find a larger list, are generally, you know, eco-friendly and supportive of sustainability.
Lynn-Jones: Decarbonization, 2.
Lynn-Jones: you know, how much we could do with that, I don't know. But if that's the consensus, we'll do it. I've already got, you know, the draft e-update for April sitting in front of me on the screen here. I just closed it to start this meeting.
Lynn-Jones: We could do a special mailing, or we could include it in that, or both.
Lynn-Jones: We already have the statements from the, Select Board.
Lynn-Jones: Some of whom refer to the override and what it would mean, and also they refer to the Parks and open space maintenance, issue, too.
Lynn-Jones: And, you know, if you haven't already taken a look, do. I mean, I… I'm not personally endorsing anyone, and neither is this organization, but it's interesting to read what the candidates have to say on the three questions, and they, you know.
Lynn-Jones: May or may not be what you would have expected going in. And,
Lynn-Jones: Politicians with much experience learn to say nothing at all in answering questions.
Lynn-Jones: you know, younger, enthusiastic candidates making their first run for office, or town-wide office, sometimes are much more direct and responsive in answering questions. That's an experience of many years, looking at what politicians say, not just a comment on the three candidates this year, but
Lynn-Jones: It is interesting what points they chose to make in answering the questions.
Lynn-Jones: Moving to another big issue, White Stadium, Article 97. Arlene could probably talk for several hours about this question. I'm not encouraging that.
Lynn-Jones: The, you know, Proceedings start on April 8th.
Lynn-Jones: I don't know if this organization could or should, you know, make any kind of statement at this point, and whether it would matter.
Lynn-Jones: But I'm gonna ask you, Arlene, I know there are lots of amicus briefs, one of which has Hugh's name on it. I don't know if one of them has your name on it, too, but they're all out there. There are amicus briefs from universities siding with Boston.
Lynn-Jones: And opposing, the ENC,
Lynn-Jones: suit, and the Mass Municipal Association, as well, has jumped in. And then there are many organizations connected to Olmstead, Parks, Open Space, who have submitted amicus briefs, supporting the Emerald Necklace Conservancy.
Lynn-Jones: And I sent you the links, it's interesting reading. I don't know if the Town of Brookline explicitly was consulted on the Mass Municipal Association brief, or whether they even took a vote, or how that came about.
Lynn-Jones: But you can guess that communities want all the flexibility that they can get when it comes to using public land for purposes like schools, and who knows what. And that's where the MMA is, you know, coming in on this.
Lynn-Jones: Universities are coming in because they don't want people to sue them to change how, a bequest that someone gave them a long time ago is being used or abused, which is one element of the suit over White Stadium.
Lynn-Jones: Bye.
Lynn-Jones: Arlene, Annie?
Arlene: I'll just say, I think you gave a good summary. I think…
Arlene: It's right out there in the municipal,
Arlene: organization's amicus brief says, we don't want restrictions on building affordable housing on parks.
Arlene: And, yeah, they made it pretty clear. We don't want…
Arlene: We don't want to be cold.
Arlene: We can't build on park land by Article 97 or anybody else by the state legislature.
Arlene: ain't one. And so…
Arlene: You know, it kind of comes down to why do we have Article 97? Exactly because of that position.
Arlene: You know, and does it map?
Arlene: No? The… the brief filed by the,
Arlene: conservation organizations, they certainly said it matters. They say that open space
Arlene: throughout Massachusetts is jeopardized if we do not enforce Article 97. And so…
Arlene: you know, the middle ground is, the position that Boston is taking that says, well, we're not really changing anything.
Arlene: And I guess if you believe that, I have a book I could sell you.
Arlene: But, well, that's kind of where it's at.
Arlene: And so… You know, it's… it could be a very, very important vote for open space in this state.
Arlene: Because, you know, we don't have… you know, Article 97 really doesn't do all that much when you come right down to it. The only way to enforce it is to sue, which is a hard…
Arlene: You know, that's not a great way of enforcing a law.
Arlene: And,
Arlene: And all it really does is to say that there should be a process. It doesn't say you can't do anything with your park land, it just says
Arlene: there should be a process. It should go to your CONCOM, it should go to your park department, it should go to your elected officials, and then…
Arlene: This should be a MEPA process, environmental review.
Arlene: And ultimately, you need a two-thirds vote of the legislature before you change parkland. It doesn't say you can't, it just says there should be a process.
Arlene: And if we don't even have that, then…
Arlene: You know, goodbye, a whole lot of parkland.
Arlene: So…
Lynn-Jones: is also the Westfield case, and at the risk of doing, you know.
Lynn-Jones: Violence to how it should be interpreted.
Lynn-Jones: You know, if it's read as saying, if parkland has been used as parkland, and has traditionally had that use, it is parkland, and it is subject to Article 97, and should be protected.
Lynn-Jones: And if that interpretation holds, Boston should lose this case. Now.
Lynn-Jones: I don't know what the SJC will rule, but it seemed to me that the Westfield case
Lynn-Jones: set a very strong, you know, precedent for protection here. Presumption being that it is parkland, that it's been used as parkland, and it's not about official statements designating it there.
Lynn-Jones: But I don't know how that's going to play out, and that seemed to be…
Lynn-Jones: One… one of the many issues the court's gonna have to decide.
Anita Johnson: Has there been argument, yeah.
Lynn-Jones: People are.
Arlene: Wednesday. And I will say that I'm very disappointed in Brookline Green Space Alliance. I thought we had taken a vote, and that we should have followed through on it, a couple of months ago.
Arlene: And I don't think that we adequately did. I don't know that, you know, would Brookline Greed Space Alliance's name on a brief.
Arlene: had a major impact. I don't know. There are a lot of really, good people that have done briefs, I guess, on both sides.
Arlene: you know, it was an opportunity to speak up, and I think we missed it. So… No.
Arlene: I'm feeling on the subject, but…
Arlene: I do think it's too late now to do anything. I mean, I know that letters can be submitted, but…
Arlene: And I think that's probably not great form.
Lynn-Jones: Okay, bro.
Lynn-Jones: I didn't quite catch what Marilyn put in the chat. I know there are going to be opportunities to watch
Lynn-Jones: the hearing on Wednesday.
Arlene: Fun… What is the,
Arlene: what site? You can go to the,
Arlene: poet site itself, and I think you can also go to YouTube.
Lynn-Jones: Okay, we… Don't have to…
Lynn-Jones: make recommendations on warrant articles for town meeting at this meeting, and in fact, I don't think we should.
Lynn-Jones: Some of you may remember we've had this discussion before, and…
Lynn-Jones: Warrant articles change right up until town meeting. They're amendments, and if you vote to endorse the original warrant article by the time it gets to town meeting, it's changed. And you have to take another vote, and then another vote, and another vote.
Lynn-Jones: But, I don't see very much in this…
Lynn-Jones: town meetings warrant that is related to green space directly. I've already signed up to speak in favor of the Community Preservation Act's,
Lynn-Jones: grants for tree inventory, green infrastructure in Lars Anderson Park, invasive species, removal at the, I think it's the, Deep Lake Lee Horse Sanctuary.
Lynn-Jones: I, I hope those will sail through, anyway.
Lynn-Jones: But, I'm gonna ask a question about the budget as it relates to tree planting and tree removal, but I'm probably not going to make an amendment, and I can wear the green space hat when I ask that question, which will be submitted in advance.
Lynn-Jones: But I don't see very much else with one potentially huge exception. There may be some people who will ask the Green Space Alliance to endorse the Chestnut Hill West zoning changes.
Lynn-Jones: And I'm not sure if that's really, you know, something we want to get into or not. But…
Lynn-Jones: That's, the, potential issue there.
Lynn-Jones: Maybe… and some changes have been made to the open space provisions, which are, again, a small part of a really big zoning overlay district that some people say, well, maybe the Green Space Alliance will like it if we change… make these changes. We can talk about that,
Lynn-Jones: in, in May, at our next meeting, but I just wanted to say that's there. If anyone else has looked at the, warrants and can think of anything apart from
Lynn-Jones: what I've mentioned that, deserves, you know, Green Space Alliance support, or opposition, one way or the other.
Lynn-Jones: I, would welcome the input, but I kind of poured over the budget, I mean, the warrant, and, apart from the… maybe the budget and the over… and the, CPA funding, there's not a whole lot here that's directly related to sustainability.
Lynn-Jones: Green space, or the environment.
Lynn-Jones: Any thoughts from other town meeting members who have started to… Look at this.
Lynn-Jones: Okay.
Lynn-Jones: Maybe something will come up.
Lynn-Jones: Between now and, may?
Lynn-Jones: And, you know, We'll see.
Lynn-Jones: My own… Feeling would be that,
Lynn-Jones: you know, the Chestnut Hill West is going to be a bit of a stretch, and like the override, it's aroused some passionate feelings on both sides.
Susan Helms Daley: I'm looking forward to learning more about that, when… in the Precinct 1 meeting that Neil Gordon set up, Sean, and I'm…
Susan Helms Daley: If it does seem to have green space relevant,
Susan Helms Daley: issues, I might ask that we revisit that at our…
Lynn-Jones: Yeah, well, we're not even really visiting it yet, because I think the next.
Susan Helms Daley: Right.
Lynn-Jones: when we should, you know, take these up. I'm just trying to…
Lynn-Jones: put… plant some ideas about what people might want to keep an eye on between now and then. And I think it was Paul Warren who set up the meeting, not Neil.
Susan Helms Daley: You're right. You're right.
Lynn-Jones: Blame where blame is due. I mean, I…
Rob Schoen: And it's Michael, right? Michael's gonna be…
Susan Helms Daley: improvement stage, yeah.
Lynn-Jones: But full disclosure, he… Michael asked me to do it, and I said, I just don't have the time. I'm setting up so many other meetings, and I'm going on vacation, for a lot of April. So, thanks to my, you know, declining the offer, Paul got stuck with it, and I'm very thankful to him for taking that up.
Lynn-Jones: Marilyn, I see your hand up.
Marilyn Ray Smith: Yeah, what… what's the…
Lynn-Jones: If we can barely hear you, I'm not sure.
Marilyn Ray Smith: Okay, what's the essence of the issue in 25 words or less?
Lynn-Jones: For which one? Chestnut Hill West?
Marilyn Ray Smith: Yeah, yeah.
Lynn-Jones: Huge commercial development right on Route 9, right on the, Brookline-Newton Line.
Lynn-Jones: This is a very large proposed set of buildings that could be built under the zoning. It might eventually raise something on the order of $5 million in new tax revenue, but certainly not immediately.
Lynn-Jones: And then there's the question of, as part of the zoning changes, is the developer required to have a certain amount of open space on-site to plant trees on-site, or to pay money into a tree fund to plant trees somewhere else?
Lynn-Jones: And how significant is that component in the larger scheme of things of this, I don't want to call it a mega-development, but it would be a major commercial development.
Lynn-Jones: With some residential components as well, but also a lot of commercial space.
Lynn-Jones: On the south side of Route 9, mainly, just as you get to the Newton line.
Marilyn Ray Smith: So it's on the same side as the,
Marilyn Ray Smith: Dalton Street, I think it is.
Lynn-Jones: as what?
Marilyn Ray Smith: Well, when you come down the hill from Brookline towards the intersection of Hammond Pawn.
Marilyn Ray Smith: Hammond Street, and the CVS is on the right, and the Cleaners is on the left, and uphill, on both sides, there's some empty land. So it's empty land on the left side, or empty land.
Lynn-Jones: It's not really empty land, it's where FedEx is, I believe. It's the land between Route 9 and the cemetery.
Marilyn Ray Smith: Oh, that's Brookline? I thought that was Newton.
Lynn-Jones: It's right up to the line. Low-rise buildings are… exist there mainly. Up to 14 stories has been proposed.
Marilyn Ray Smith: Oh my god. So it's across the street from the store market.
Lynn-Jones: Yeah, and that parcel might or might not be rezoned, that's where it gets more complicated, because the developer owns the south side parcel, but not the gas station CDS area.
Marilyn Ray Smith: Yeah.
Lynn-Jones: That's actually been a controversy, whether it should be included or not.
Lynn-Jones: And Newton has come to meetings and said, you didn't tell us about this.
Marilyn Ray Smith: Gas stations in Brookline?
Lynn-Jones: I believe so.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: Yup.
Marilyn Ray Smith: I didn't know that.
Lynn-Jones: You know, long ago, this was a controversy because the zoning was changed.
Lynn-Jones: Newton got the development, the Star Market, Brookline got the parking lot. And you can guess which brought in the most tax revenue.
Lynn-Jones: That was a long time ago.
Marilyn Ray Smith: That is so interesting.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: CVS is Brookline, and then there's a couple of houses that are Brookline, and Star Market is Newton.
Marilyn Ray Smith: So the parking lot is Brookline. That is amazing.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: Part of it.
Marilyn Ray Smith: I'm gonna ask that question.
Marilyn Ray Smith: So that, yeah.
Lynn-Jones: It's a complicated history, a complicated current situation, and some people say that the developer who is seeking all these changes will flip the, you know, property that they own.
Lynn-Jones: But…
Lynn-Jones: We could probably talk about an hour about this, and Debbie would probably have a lot to say, too.
Marilyn Ray Smith: You told me all I need to know, thank you.
Lynn-Jones: I've been fair and just summing up what it's all about.
Marilyn Ray Smith: drinking.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: It started out to be more of a commercial, wanting it to be more of a commercial development, and it's now turning into the, the people that bought it want more
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: you know, condos. They want more housing. So, it's… and then, so there's a lot of controversy there. And unfortunately, if you go by… it's where HealthWorks was, and if you go by there, there's a beautiful…
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: green area there with a huge tree, and that's going. It just broke my heart. They tried, they fought for that to keep that, but that's not…
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: Gonna stay, but… so, unfortunately.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: That's a lot of the controversy. They, they want… we want more commercial, and, the people that bought it
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: Of course don't.
Lynn-Jones: And to be fair, there are divisions in town among town meeting members. Some town meeting members love housing and would like to see more housing.
Lynn-Jones: Other town meeting members say, from a fiscal standpoint, commercial development brings in more tax revenue and imposes fewer burdens on the town budget. And that's where people start to argue.
Lynn-Jones: Marilyn.
Marilyn Ray Smith: I thought… I don't want to beat a dead horse, but I thought that in situations like this, that on the ground level, for the first couple of stories, it's commercial, and then after that is housing. If you're talking about a 14-story building, which I think is pretty extraordinary for that neighborhood, there's nothing there anywhere close to that.
Marilyn Ray Smith: That's a skyscraper for Brookline standards.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: Nope.
Lynn-Jones: Yep, well, the town meeting members in those precincts would certainly agree with that point you just made, Marilyn.
Lynn-Jones: But… You know, the whole question of the commercial residential development is really complicated.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: Yes.
Marilyn Ray Smith: the money, they don't care about anything except the money. I get that, it's so true.
Lynn-Jones: Yeah.
Marilyn Ray Smith: But I'm not sure they're super careful about how they spend their money, as long as somebody else is paying for it. And so…
Marilyn Ray Smith: You know, but anyway, that's another story.
Lynn-Jones: Okay, I think we've covered, all of these hot-button issues, on the agenda.
Lynn-Jones: And we've taken no positions at all. I mean, I don't know if that's a good thing or a bad thing, but it's where we've come out for now, and, you know, we'll revisit. I'm assuming, though, that there's not going to be any objection to my speaking for the Green Space Alliance on the CPA
Lynn-Jones: open space and recreation items. Oh, the other thing at town meeting that I did forget to mention, but I did mention it in that budget analysis, the $300,000 in the CIP for lighting at the driving range, will raise, some questions and concerns and provoke debate.
Lynn-Jones: And Debbie may have an update, but the golf course was supposed to do a study, or commission a study, of the impact on wildlife, and maybe on the neighbors too, and…
Lynn-Jones: it's been crickets, since they said they were going to deliver that kind of analysis to inform a decision. And I don't know…
Lynn-Jones: Where we are. Antonia.
Antonia Bellalta: Was this about the lighting? Sorry.
Lynn-Jones: Yes.
Antonia Bellalta: Yep.
Lynn-Jones: Park and Rec has discussed the lighting. They've had other community meetings to discuss the lighting, and it's put into the CIP as a recreation item, paid for in the general CIP.
Lynn-Jones: But it has to be voted on at town meeting, and there may be some opposition due to the impact on wildlife and the neighbors, and if Jane Flanagan were here, she could tell you a lot about wildlife.
Lynn-Jones: This is a bad idea.
Antonia Bellalta: Yeah, no, I agree. I mean, I… full disclosure, so everybody knows, I am on the Friends of Putterham.
Antonia Bellalta: And I joined because I was part of the landscape master plan for the development of the golf course. And one of my focuses, Arlene knows, is to make sure that we push as much as possible
Antonia Bellalta: green practices and, more plantings. There are things that happen
Antonia Bellalta: that I don't… I'm not always aware of. I did know about the lighting and discussed about how difficult the lighting was, and I do know from the last meeting that we went to that they have made some changes based on some comments that were made about the wildlife.
Antonia Bellalta: And they are going to be updating that, I think, next month with Park and Rec.
Antonia Bellalta: So, I haven't seen it myself, but I will go to that meeting at Park and Rec to see it.
Lynn-Jones: I just wanted to highlight that there would be strong feelings on this question, and, you know, we need.
Antonia Bellalta: Oh, no, definitely, I know, definitely.
Lynn-Jones: we'd think about.
Antonia Bellalta: Definitely, definitely, yep.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: Yeah.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: Anything to add, either. I haven't heard… that's exactly what we wanted, was some sort of study,
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: And I have not heard, but if you're saying they changed something, I don't know about that either.
Antonia Bellalta: I think they had wildlife specialists come in and look at the lighting they presented with them. They had some other horticulturists. I haven't seen them myself. That's why I want to go to the Park and Rec meeting to see it.
Debbie Hatzieleftheriadis: Yeah.
Antonia Bellalta: I did ask Justin last week, and he gave me that update, and he said they have made some changes, and that they were going to bring it back.
Antonia Bellalta: You know, and present it to the public.
Lynn-Jones: Okay. Before turning to Marilyn, I'll just say there's sort of a really broad philosophical question, regardless of the particular lighting, you know, lumens, angles, wildlife impact, and that is, you know, is the purpose of the driving range to generate as much revenue as possible?
Lynn-Jones: to provide as much recreation as possible, or to have the least possible impact on the natural environment? And how do you balance those different objectives here?
Lynn-Jones: But clearly, this is a change that would bring in a fair amount of money for the golf course, and enable it to invest in, you know, the various other aspects of its master plan for the landscape, and, you know, that's…
Antonia Bellalta: Yeah, and I think the big thing is to keep on developing it as a multi-use facility. Like, this winter, how they had…
Antonia Bellalta: Cross-country skiing and snowshoeing, and he did give me a very high number of people who had attended using the golf course for that.
Antonia Bellalta: And I think they raised $13,000 or $14,000 just in ski rentals, but it was a free admission.
Antonia Bellalta: And so the, the revenue… for…
Antonia Bellalta: That would, come from the… green… the range.
Antonia Bellalta: It would be to help improve ours in having the… House… the clubhouse opened longer?
Antonia Bellalta: To service the community for dinner, because right now they have limited hours because the community doesn't show up late at night, and the golfers, you know, right?
Antonia Bellalta: So, it is a big balance, and then also, the other thing is the tree planting.
Antonia Bellalta: Replanting.
Antonia Bellalta: process, and developing of natural grasses and things like that. So, he's trying to support that,
Antonia Bellalta: Doing a lot with the waterways, cleaning up and channeling. You know, it's been a huge,
Antonia Bellalta: civil engineering feat, what he's accomplishing there, Tope.
Antonia Bellalta: I know there are some wins and there are some losses, for sure.
Lynn-Jones: And I'll just say, more broadly before turning to Marilyn, you know, the cross-country skiing is just one aspect of trying to get the most out of that property for the public. You know, I went to this new event, Bloomin' and Movin'.
Antonia Bellalta: Oh my god.
Lynn-Jones: tabled for Green Space Alliance on, Saturday morning.
Lynn-Jones: There's Harvest Fest that they do in the fall. They've invested in, reopening Putterim Woods, and there'll be more there. You know, it's, you know, all these things fit together, and it's complicated.
Lynn-Jones: Because some of these things… some of these things sound great, and some of them might not sound so great, but, you know, we are…
Lynn-Jones: Debating, you know, all of these things are connected, and the money gets to be used for all sorts of good things if you have it, but…
Lynn-Jones: Is money the only thing that matters if there's a negative impact as well? And I'm just trying to throw it out there for discussion. It's not an easy call when you look at the big picture. Maryland.
Antonia Bellalta: No, it's not.
Marilyn Ray Smith: Are these lights supposed to be on all night? They're gonna turn them off at 9 o'clock at night.
Lynn-Jones: No, I think it's more like 10.
Lynn-Jones: 7 to 10, but the hours are still negotiable, but that's what they're thinking, more or less.
Antonia Bellalta: I think, now I remember.
Marilyn Ray Smith: big impact on the wildlife. I mean, they really do.
Antonia Bellalta: lights do… I guess one of the things is that since the driving range is already enclosed.
Antonia Bellalta: animals aren't necessarily so much prone to going into that area. And the one thing that I do remember now, if I can say, is that they did look about the migration of birds, and when that happens, and that they've agreed to
Antonia Bellalta: not have the lights on longer during that time. If they can, you know, it might vary from year to year, but they're going to try and coordinate, you know, the migration back and forth of
Antonia Bellalta: Peace.
Marilyn Ray Smith: the geese.
Antonia Bellalta: Snow the birds.
Marilyn Ray Smith: Okay, that's the.
Antonia Bellalta: other birds.
Marilyn Ray Smith: beef.
Marilyn Ray Smith: Keith.
Lynn-Jones: We want to make the geese go away!
Antonia Bellalta: Yeah, get them out of here.
Marilyn Ray Smith: I mean, that's the problem with the geese, they're migratory birds, except they're not, and so you can't do anything to get rid of them.
Antonia Bellalta: Anyway, maybe I'm saying the wrong… the wrong birds, but they've… they looked at a wildlife specialist, and they're dealing with that.
Lynn-Jones: But anyway, we will return to this at the next meeting. Thanks.
Lynn-Jones: That's it, unless someone has new business. I, you know, listed all of the, events coming up.
Lynn-Jones: And there are quite a few here. I'll be, getting the word out about the Zoom coffee and Earth Day,
Lynn-Jones: Soon, and
Lynn-Jones: One thing that we haven't talked about much is the Friends of Brookline Raptors, who are advocating for banning rodenticides, but they've organized an event at the library where there'll be a real live raptor for people to see.
Lynn-Jones: tickets, will go… well, not on sale, they'll be free, but they'll be available half an hour before, first come, first served. And I will put that out in the email, and it's already posted on the library website, but that's,
Lynn-Jones: kind of new, and we are co-sponsoring that event with the friends so that they can, you know, get the word out, and it's much easier to do when you actually have a bird in the room. I don't know if it's a hawk or an owl or what. Probably not an eagle, but we are promised a real
Lynn-Jones: Raptor to get acquainted with. Susan, then Rob.
Susan Helms Daley: Thanks.
Susan Helms Daley: I just wanted to get an announcement, Ernest Cook and I are actually gonna be… oh, am I frozen?
Ernest Cook: Nope, can't hear you.
Susan Helms Daley: Okay, I'm frozen on my screen. Anyway, Ernest and I are actually co-hosting, a fundraiser
Susan Helms Daley: For the Charles River Watershed Association on Wednesday, May 20th, next month.
Susan Helms Daley: Is everyone else getting these… this meeting is being recorded? Announcements? Sorry. Anyway, just a, you'll be receiving, an email, paperless post about it, but all of your names will be on the list, and we hope that you'll be able to join us
Susan Helms Daley: Hopefully on our… in our backyard at my house, on Wednesday evening, May 20th.
Susan Helms Daley: That's it.
Lynn-Jones: Okay.
Lynn-Jones: And Rob?
Rob Schoen: Yeah, I hate to ask a question at this time. Antonio, this is… we're on pace for a record.
Rob Schoen: For, adjourning a Green Space Alliance meeting, but,
Rob Schoen: My question was, you know, the… we had that… that grant to the Brookline News.
Rob Schoen: I was wondering how you… if you have any kind of…
Rob Schoen: take on how that's gone. I haven't…
Rob Schoen: noticed any… a lot of green space, any change in the Green Space Alliance? I mean, the green space coverage?
Rob Schoen: In the paper, but, you know, I could have missed stories here and there, so I was curious what you thought, Sean.
Lynn-Jones: Well, I thought they'd done a fair amount, the reporter on that beat.
Lynn-Jones: I think it's, Delaney Dreyfus, and, you know, if you search
Lynn-Jones: On the, the website.
Lynn-Jones: You probably will find the various stories. There hasn't been one for a little while.
Rob Schoen: Hmm.
Lynn-Jones: And, so I'm not quite sure what the current status is, but I noticed, you know, maybe not a plethora, but certainly, you know.
Lynn-Jones: Several.
Rob Schoen: I just thought there was something we should monitor going forward.
Lynn-Jones: And they do run, when they, you know, do that story, a little bit of a credit line saying, this story was financed in part by the Brookline Green Space Alliance, but the brookline.news is, you know, entirely responsible for the content.
Ernest Cook: done.
Lynn-Jones: I don't… have you seen those? You know what I mean?
Rob Schoen: Yeah, I guess I haven't.
Lynn-Jones: If your attention span is long enough to get to the end of the story, you see that little…
Lynn-Jones: Little blurb down at the bottom, you know, about responsibility.
Rob Schoen: Got it.
Lynn-Jones: Thank you very much.
Rob Schoen: much.
Lynn-Jones: But I do watch closely, but I haven't been tracking all of them.
Rob Schoen: Yeah.
Lynn-Jones: And, you know, it certainly… I can't tell you what it would have been without the grant, but it certainly seemed as though they were making, an effort.
Rob Schoen: Okay, great.
Lynn-Jones: So,
Lynn-Jones: there isn't anything else. I will just say regarding White Stadium and the ENC court case there, when this came up, there seemed to be feeling among the board that we couldn't vote if we didn't have anything to vote on.
Lynn-Jones: And in terms of an amicus brief, we certainly couldn't spend the time drafting it.
Lynn-Jones: And we have not…
Lynn-Jones: seen, you know, an abacus brief, although you can now look at them. They're posted on the docket for the April 8th hearing.
Lynn-Jones: And so that's where we left it. The deadline then was March 18th for submitting them, which wouldn't have given much turnaround.
Rob Schoen: No, I think… I don't think Hugh had… there wasn't time. Hugh had wanted us to look at it, and there just wasn't time to… before the deadline for us to get together and vote on it.
Lynn-Jones: Yeah, and I detected a feeling that we couldn't vote on something we hadn't seen.
Rob Schoen: Right.
Lynn-Jones: Some people may have, sided with the city, too, but that's, you know, apart from the, you know, issue of, not having a document and not being able to write one.
Lynn-Jones: And I know it's been very time-consuming for Hugh to get embroiled in writing one.
Lynn-Jones: And, we've had, you know, a whole bunch of other activities that I've been involved in, and I didn't have time to write an amicus brief, too.
Lynn-Jones: Is there a motion to adjourn?
Rob Schoen: Tell Anita…
Anita Johnson: One thing, does anyone know, the hearing on this case before the SJC, is it before the SJC on Wednesday, and what time, and where? Does anyone know that, Arlene?
Lynn-Jones: I think Arlene might have signed off, but I might be able to tell you.
Marilyn Ray Smith: I know.
Anita Johnson: Okay.
Marilyn Ray Smith: I know where it is.
Anita Johnson: Alan's got it.
Marilyn Ray Smith: It's at 9 o'clock in the SJC, it is the SJC itself, and I think it's in Room 1 or something like that, and I put twice in the chat that the ENC is having a watch party at the Hurley House at 9 o'clock on
Marilyn Ray Smith: So, if you don't want to truck all the way downtown, you can watch…
Anita Johnson: I can't hear you, Marilyn. They're having a party to watch the, arguments?
Marilyn Ray Smith: ANC is having an event with refreshments, which is probably donuts and coffee, at the Curly House at 9 o'clock on April 8th, Wednesday. If you want to go to the SJC itself, it is in the SJC, and I think it's in Room 1. I don't know why it's… usually the SJC's upstairs.
Anita Johnson: What's, what, what is the… what is the name of the case?
Marilyn Ray Smith: Emerald necklace against somebody, I think. No, I don't remember the name of it, but you can…
Lynn-Jones: Nita, I just emailed you the information about the watch party, as well as the links to watch online.
Anita Johnson: Thank you, thank you.
Anita Johnson: Thank you very much.
Lynn-Jones: And I emailed earlier the docket, which will tell you more about.
Anita Johnson: Oh, I'm sorry I missed it.
Lynn-Jones: Just… just about 3.30 this afternoon.
Lynn-Jones: But just now, I sent you the… Watch party and other information.
Lynn-Jones: If you're interested.
Lynn-Jones: I'll send that…
Anita Johnson: Thank you so much.
Lynn-Jones: Two, if you're, you know, Interested in seeing how this goes.
Lynn-Jones: But anyway… .
Rob Schoen: Motion, motion to adjourn?
Lynn-Jones: And is there a second?
Lynn-Jones: Surely there's a second.
Olivia Fischer Fox: a second.
Lynn-Jones: And I'm sure we're all in favor of adjourning.
Olivia Fischer Fox: So…
Lynn-Jones: It's unanimous, we will adjourn. And I just wanted to say our next meeting on Monday, May 5th, will be hosted by Ernest, because I am going to be in Cambridge, England, that evening, and I'm not sure what my Wi-Fi will be like.
Lynn-Jones: But I'm definitely gonna try to, participate, but don't count on me to host.
Lynn-Jones: These are the…
Rob Schoen: 5th through the 4th.
Lynn-Jones: Am I wrong?
Rob Schoen: maybe…
Anita Johnson: Sunday is the 4th.
Lynn-Jones: Okay, you're right, I'm 4th.
Rob Schoen: And what time is the annual meeting?
Lynn-Jones: I was looking at the 2025 calendar.
Rob Schoen: And the annual meeting is at what time?
Lynn-Jones: Starting 5.30 with refreshments, we'll try to get to the business portion as soon as possible, like, you know, 5.56, and then 6.15, I hope we'll be able to get to the talk, and they… they probably won't kick us out until 7.30.
Lynn-Jones: That's always where they start to stand around and look at us, and look at their watches, and, you know, it's clear that it's time to leave, but they don't pull the plug on the, you know.
Lynn-Jones: AV system until, about 7.30.
Lynn-Jones: Okay.
Lynn-Jones: But yeah, Monday, May 4th.
Lynn-Jones: By PM.
Lynn-Jones: 10pm for me in England.
Lynn-Jones: Thank you. See you then, I hope. Thank you.
Antonia Bellalta: Thanks for having me.
Antonia Bellalta: Look forward to the next one. Bye.
Lynn-Jones: Aye.